So let's look at.
One attempt to answer our
question about what's
metaphysically necessary for
your personal survival. This
answer involves appeal to
psychological continuity.
I want to take the view as
carefully as I can, because
although the idea is simple,
it's very easy to get confused
about the details in a way that
will prevent interesting
disagreements. So let me say,
this is the view.
Necessarily. A person existing
at one time is a person existing
at another time.
If and only if the first
mentioned person. Can remember.
At that first time and
experience that the second
mention purse and had at the
second time or vice versa.
This is the idea of
psychological continuity. It
gives us what looks like an
answer to Olson's question about
the circumstances under which
it's the case. That one thing is
identical to a person.
Very simple. What would be the
problems with this view? Well
firstly as I formulated it here,
we're focusing just on memories,
but you might think that that's
much too narrow. You might take
a view of psychological
continuity that stresses, for
example, the way that emotions
unfold overtime. You go through
a period of grief. Your grief
unfolds over months, and
Fortunately many cases over some
years, and the person who is
grieving. Now that grief is
shaped by the way that the
grief was happening earlier,
so we could expand this to to
take into account more than
memories. That's one
possibility, but the details
there won't affect the
arguments that were making at
this level.
The other thing we need to think
about here is transitivity. So
if we're potentially making a
claim about identity, we want
the identity relation to be
transitive, so it's no good. For
example, if the second smallest
person here can remember
something of the first smallest
person, I criterion would be met
and the third smallest person
can remember something of the
2nd. Smallest person's memories.
Then you might want to say Well
the 1st and 2nd smallest people.
Meet the criterion Here Fried
entity and the second and third
smallest people here meet the
criterion for identity. But the
1st and the third person don't
right by the time you get to
that third personal, perhaps a
little bit further along the
chain, one of the bigger people
just has no recollection at all
of the smaller people. Then
you've been a really crazy
situation where you want to say
look the first ones identical to
the second one, the second one
is identical to the third one,
but the first isn't identical to
the third. You contradicted
yourself. Now here, there's a
very simple solution. What we
need to do is to refine the
view. They were expressing by
appeal to the transitive
closure. Of the relation just
mentioned, ask your logic
teachers about transitive
closure. Very important idea,
but it's really a matter for
logic, so we won't worry about
that too much. Here we're going
to suppose that that formality
is taking care of for us.
So here we got nicely put the.
Psychological continuity view
about personal identity. You can
see that it looks like an answer
to olsens question.
What's good about this?
Well, one thing that's good
about this years. It allows
us to make sense of
scenarios like that from
altered carbon that I
mentioned in introducing
this topic right at the
beginning when I was
introducing all the topics.
So if you remember the person
there who's being hugged is the
daughter of those parents who is
being put into the body of a
much older person.
If that idea makes sense, if you
think that could happen and.
The film seems to be perfectly
coherent. Then it could only be
something like psychological
continuity, few that allows us
to say that the daughter in
question is now has the body of
this old woman. The sleeve in
terms of altered carbon.
So I like this. I like this
view. About personal identity,
insofar as it allows us to make
sense of lots of things that do
seem like they are
metaphysically possible that.
Abandoning by a person of a body
in order to adopt A new body or
forced to adopt A new body in
this case. But we also run into
an interesting problem here. You
see I think this is true. Sam is
a person friend of mine.
Actually, Sam wasn't embryo and
unfortunately unless you
recover, she's going to be in a
permanent vegetative state.
So that's true as well.
Well, I want to say that on
the face of it, it looks like
these claims are inconsistent.
But strictly speaking, then not
inconsistent, it looks like
these two claims, one and three
are inconsistent, but strictly
speaking there not inconsistent
now, just at this point, I want
to really get people thinking.
So instead of explaining to you
why I think these two claims are
consistent and they are
consistent. Actually I want you
to think in 90 seconds, ideally
with a friend. Why is it that
these two claims are consistent
now? This is important and it's
going to take this is the sort
of core of the week seven our
task as well so.
This is a kind of gritty key
thing. Why is it that one and
three? Are actually consistent.
How do we make them consistent?
90 seconds go.
OK, so claims one and three
are not inconsistent. That's to
say there's a possible situation
in which the first claim is
true and the third claim is
true. It's not the case that
they can't both be true. What
would make those claims?
Inconsistent where we have to
add a third claim.
The third claim is that person
essentialism is true. What's
personal essentialism? Let me
illustrate the idea by telling
you about my little Hannah and
her friend Annabelle Annabelle.
Is this vegetable hit? You know
what I blanked on what the
vegetables called. What's this
vegetable called? If you know if
you were here, you could answer
that question anyway. Look,
here's some kind of vegetable
and we were going to cook this
vegetable and Hanna said Steve
Daddy, you can't cook the
vegetable because this is
Annabelle. This is Annabelle.
And eventually got around this
because I persuaded her that
what would happen is that we
would eat Annabelle and she
would come back to us as a
mango. She will come back to us
as a mango and we were in the
shops kind of push. 'cause we
buy mangoes. Not really. We were
in the shops and unfortunately
the person in front of us. But
Annabelle, Mango and it ended
very badly anyway. Look, here's
Hannah. It's a butternut squash
by the way, right? His handle
with Butternut Squash called
Annabelle and here's how his
view of the matter. So Hannah
thinks that the butternut squash
wasn't always Annabelle or any
other person. She thinks that
there was a time when the
Butternut Squash was no person
at all. She also thinks that
there's a time when the
Butternut Squash in the future
won't be Annabelle. When I cook
it, it will cease being
Annabelle and some other things
will become Annabelle so the
butternut squash which is now
Annabelle, is identical with the
seed and the seed was never
Annabelle nor any person. So
Hannah has a view on which
personal essentialism is wrong.
On Hannahs view, being a person
is a kind of accidental property
as property that you can have
for awhile and then lose right
like the property for example.
Of being tool right, you can
have the property of being tool
and overtime you can shrink and
then you're no longer at all.
It's an accident that your tool
now, but not at some other time.
Likewise with property of being
rich, it's kind of an accident,
right? So you might be rich now,
but bad stuff can happen to you
and you won't be rich later.
It's not an essential property.
By contrast, my view of the
matter is a little bit
different. My view is that
Hannah is a person essentially,
being a person is not an
attribute that she could lose or
gain without ceasing to exist
altogether. Hanover person
essentially is just part of.
It's a necessary thing for her
to exist at all.
What this means, of course, is
that the person Hannah was once
an embryo. It follows from that.
That Hannah sorry it follows
from that the embryo must be a
person as well. You see that if
I think that Hannah is identical
with the embryo and I hold onto
the view. Of personal
essentialism, that's to say
that being a person is not an
accidental but an essential
property. It follows, of
course, that the embryo must
also be a person.
Does this inform my views about
abortion? Not at all, right? I
don't think that some kind of
clever, logical, quirky move
should guide practical action.
That's nuts view. I don't think
they should influence our views
about abortion at all, but I do
think person essentialism is a
straightforward and attractive
you. And if you hold person
essentialism, and you think that
Hannah. Is the embryo.
Then of course, you have to
think that the embryo is a
person very simple. So where are
we have shown that person
essentialism is true, not at
all, not at all, right? I I
can't persuade anybody that that
that view is true or false. So
what am I trying to show? Good
question. What I'm trying to
show is that psychological
continuity views of personal
identity do presuppose person
essentialism. If you want to
hold a psychological continuity
view of personal identity.
Then you have to be a person
essentialised why's that?
Because that criterion of
psychological continuity.
Will not be a criterion of
identity. If you allow that
purse being a person, is next
dental property property that
you can gain or lose?
In that case, you haven't
offered a criterion of identity
at all. So if you think of
psychological continuity as a
view about personal identity.
Then you must also think that.
Being a person is a property you
have. Essentially you have to
hold onto personal essentialism.
No way around that, so I'm not
saying that person essentialism
is true or false, but I am
saying that if we discussing
psychological views of personal
identity. Then we are assuming.
Personal essentialism very
good, so here then are three
inconsistent claims,
hopefully understandable
person essentialism is 3
inconsistent claims are first
of all the one about Sam.
Secondly, the claim that
person essentialism is true.
And Thirdly the claim that
psychological continuity is
the criterion of personal
identity, put those three
claims together and you have
something which of course is
inconsistent. Why's that
inconsistent? That's because.
The first 2 claims imply that.
The person Sam is the person
who's the embryo. The third
claim must. It tells us that the
person who is Sam must have
memories, that of experiences
that the embryo had, or
Conversely, and that's false.
That's where we get our
contradiction. See how that
works. So those three claims are
inconsistent. And this of course
provides us with the basis for
an objection to psychological
continuity views. Ejection is
that the first 2 claims.
Are both plausable.
Moreover, if you reject the
second claim, then.
Appealing to psychological
continuity won't give you a view
of personal identity at all.
Appealing to psychological
continuity might tell you about
something else, but it won't
tell you about personal
identity, so it seems like.
The person who proposes
psychological continuity as a
criterion of personal identity
has to reject one.
The view that Sam was an embryo
and that unless Sam recovers,
Sam will be in a permanent
vegetative state. Now suppose
that's an objection. If you
think that that first claim is
true. And of course there could
be some debate, but whether that
first claim is really true. But
what I think is completely
beyond doubt is that is this.
His was beyond doubt.
If your personal identity
theory appeals to
psychological continuity,
then you have to reject the
idea that you or Sam or
anybody else is a person was
ever an embryo and you have
to reject the idea that they
could ever become in a
permanent vegetative state.
Those two things are
impossible on this view.
So where are we? I've told you
something about what
psychological continuity views
are. Hope you got basic idea of
that. I've introduced to the
idea of person essentialism and
have suggested following Olson
that if you hold psychological
continuity, view of personal
identity, you're committed.
To holding that person,
essentialism is true. We've also
seen that there are. Those are
interesting line of objection to
psychological continuity views.
The objection is simply that you
were in embryo.
You can't say that if you think
psychological continuity view is
true now. There's also another
line of objection that we have
not discussed here. This is the
idea that you can be
psychologically continuous with
more than one individual. That's
another well known line of
objection that we're not going
to consider in this course.
So our focus is just on the line
of rejection from the idea that
you were in embryo. Some people
think that's a decisive
objection to psychological
continuity views other people
think. Well, actually there's a
way to see this not as an
objection at all, right? It's
not really an objection to say
that I was never an embryo and
or where you interesting idea,
it will be good later to know
when you're writing about this
topic. What considerations
you think are decisive or
informative about
psychological continuity?
Views of personal identity?